Implement complete end-to-end namespace-based export control (#41096)
cilium-team/cilium: Documentation/network/clustermesh/services.rst

     selector:
       name: rebel-base

.. _namespace_export_control:

> Namespace-based Export Control

Reviewer: nit, I didn't really pay close attention to this during the CFP but I think the name could be improved. "Export Control" has another meaning which would be ideal to avoid conflict with. Perhaps...?

```suggestion
.. _namespace_export_control:

Clustermesh Namespace Export Filtering
```

> Namespace-based Export Control

Reviewer 2: Super high level comment but I have two main point of concern about this doc:
- This pages is for Global Services while the global namespace annotation is not tied specifically to (Global) Services, so it should probably be somewhere else. I am not sure where that somewhere else would be though, maybe it could be its own page?
- This documentation looks a bit too verbose as is, but I see that Joe left many comments that would most likely already involve this point too

And as Joe also said, this could very well be in a separated PR!

##############################

By default, all namespaces in a cluster are considered global for ClusterMesh
resource sharing. To enhance security and control which namespaces export
resources to other clusters, you can enable namespace-based export control

> through namespace annotations.

Reviewer: I would suggest adding another sentence after this that describes concisely what namespace-based export control does. This paragraph currently implies what it does but doesn't outright describe the feature.

The "To enhance security" part also comes across at least to me as marketing the feature, not describing to the user exactly what the implications are.

Reviewer: ^ Maybe I need to take another look at the CFP, but worst case I could see this making security worse if users are not expecting the behavior. It's a different model for how information is shared which has certain properties, so I'm not sure it's fair to the user to portray the feature as just improving security. Furthermore, the CFP didn't describe anything about improving security, instead it described improving _scalability_ so I'm surprised to see these documents touting security as the goal.

Prerequisites
============

For namespace-based export control to work correctly, you need to understand:

* When no namespaces are annotated, the behavior remains exactly the same as
  the traditional ClusterMesh setup (backwards compatible)
* When the first namespace receives the ``clustermesh.cilium.io/global``
  annotation, namespace filtering becomes active

> * Only resources from namespaces marked as global will be shared across clusters

Reviewer: These are not prerequisites. It's better to just outright describe this in regular paragraphs rather than instructing the person to know something. The reader is already here, let's just describe the functionality directly to them instead of telling them they need to know stuff and listing it.

I suspect this might even work if we just drop the line 78 here and remove the list item formatting and just put the sentences together. It could be wordsmithed to read a bit more naturally than that, but it'd be a good start.

Configuration
============

Global Namespace Annotation
---------------------------

To mark a namespace as global and enable resource export to other clusters:

.. code-block:: yaml

   apiVersion: v1
   kind: Namespace
   metadata:
     name: production
     annotations:
       clustermesh.cilium.io/global: "true"

To explicitly mark a namespace as local (non-global):

.. code-block:: yaml

   apiVersion: v1
   kind: Namespace
   metadata:
     name: development
     annotations:
       clustermesh.cilium.io/global: "false"

Default Global Namespace Behavior
---------------------------------

You can configure the default behavior for namespaces without annotations
using the ``clustermesh.defaultGlobalNamespace`` configuration option:

.. parsed-literal::

   helm install cilium |CHART_RELEASE| \\
     --namespace kube-system \\
     --set clustermesh.defaultGlobalNamespace=false

When set to ``false`` (recommended for security), unannotated namespaces are

> treated as local by default when namespace filtering is active.

Reviewer: The `(recommended for security)` aside here is terse and implies a lot more knowledge that is not being described. I would suggest removing that and reconsidering where in this document it makes sense to explain the top level security implications instead.

Global Service Requirements
==========================

When namespace-based export control is active, a service must satisfy **both**
conditions to be considered a Global Service:

1. The service must be annotated with ``service.cilium.io/global: "true"``

> 2. The service must reside within a namespace marked as global

Reviewer: This seems like an unordered list:

```suggestion
* The service must be annotated with ``service.cilium.io/global: "true"``
* The service must reside within a namespace marked as global
```

> .. code-block:: yaml

Reviewer: What is this code block? There is no text that describes what it's doing here or what the reader should know.

   # Global namespace
   apiVersion: v1
   kind: Namespace
   metadata:
     name: production
     annotations:
       clustermesh.cilium.io/global: "true"
   ---
   # Global service within global namespace
   apiVersion: v1
   kind: Service
   metadata:
     name: backend-service
     namespace: production
     annotations:
       service.cilium.io/global: "true"
   spec:
     type: ClusterIP
     ports:
     - port: 80
     selector:
       app: backend

Edge Cases and Behavior
======================

* **Activation**: When the first namespace receives a global annotation,
  filtering becomes active and all resources from non-global namespaces
  are removed from the shared etcd store
* **Deactivation**: When the last annotated namespace is removed or loses
  its annotation, filtering becomes inactive and all namespace resources
  are backfilled into etcd (backwards compatibility mode)
* **Transition**: Resources are dynamically added/removed from etcd as

>   namespace annotations change

Reviewer: Is this information different from the "Prerequisites" information? Seems like this would be better documented together as part of the "concepts" preparation to directly describe the feature.

Testing and Validation
=====================

To test namespace-based export control:

1. Verify initial backwards compatibility (no annotations):

   .. code-block:: shell-session

>       cilium clustermesh status --context $CLUSTER1

Reviewer: How is this verifying backwards compatibility?

2. Add global annotation to a namespace and verify filtering activation

3. Check that only resources from global namespaces appear in other clusters

> 4. Validate global service functionality with both namespace and service annotations

Reviewer: The average user is not going to be able to follow these steps. Consider expanding them to instruct the user exactly what commands to run, and provide example output.
